[RFC 0094] Use Matrix for Official Chat (#94)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0094-use-matrix-for-official-chat.md

---
start-date: 2020-05-19
author: Ryan Mulligan
shepherd-team:
shepherd-leader:
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Switch from Freenode to our own Matrix homeserver as our official
community chat.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The current official community chat host, Freenode, has lost its
leadership and its future is uncertain. Many Free Software communities

> are abandoning it, so its network affects may be negative instead of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are abandoning it, so its network effects may be negative instead of
```

positive.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

Update the [NixOS.org community
page](https://nixos.org/community/index.html) to point to the new
Matrix homeserver that has already been created which you can join by
visting the [Invite

> link](https://app.element.io/#/room/#community:nixos.org).

Reviewer: It's not really joining the server per-se. Maybe mention that you have to make an account elsewhere and then you can join the #community:nixos.org space? (Maybe this is getting into the semantics too much? Not sure how detailed these RFCs are supposed to be.)

Reviewer 2: Having to find a suitable homeserver from which to participate is an obstacle that should be mentioned.

Reviewer: Agree. That is a downside for sure. Maybe worth mentioning that matrix.org is at least decent these days?

Author: When you visit the invite link, it has a workflow where you can make an account on `matrix.org`. If you want to write some more detailed guide and put it on the NixOS wiki or something, I'd link to it!

Author: I've removed mentions of homeservers from the RFC, but if someone wants to come up with a self contained paragraph that talks about them, I'd like to include it.

Reviewer 2: > Maybe worth mentioning that matrix.org is at least decent these days?

I'd think the exact opposite. Don't throw your (decentralized) eggs in one (centralized) basket.

Reviewer: > I'd think the exact opposite. Don't throw your (decentralized) eggs in one (centralized) basket.

Well, I  would rather people get on matrix.org than not get on at all :shrug:

Reviewer 3: I think it's worth mentioning that everyone being on `matrix.org` is about equivalent to the freenode status quo ante. A single person off `matrix.org` is more decentralized than freenode #nixos was.

Reviewer 4: I think also the most important point is that each person can make that choice. If you are happy with `matrix.org` (as I am for now) you can use it. If you want to self host then you can and will be isolated from anything that happens on `matrix.org`. With the other proposed options that choice is made for you, whether that is Slack or Discord or a NixOS-hosted XMPP chat room.

Update any other places that point to Freenode to point to Matrix

> instead.

Reviewer 5: Some examples:

* nix-channel-monitor
* github PR events
* karma bot?
* eval bot
* factoids bot

the PR unfurler is probably not necessary with the built-in support for unfurling.

Reviewer: I personally really appreciate the URL unfurling for GitHub issues/PRs because (a) I don't have URL previews enabled on my client (the UX is too noisy and verbose) and (b) you can just mention a PR/issue number and it will unfurl a link to the correct GitHub issue.

Personally, I would suggest that rooms should be set to disable URL previews by default for all participants. Individual participants can change this if they desire.

Author: I've added a section about the bots, so people are aware of the work required to do it. I don't really want to get into the details about what to do with bots, unless the details imply we really shouldn't (or should) be using Matrix.

Reviewer: That's fair. I think the fact that there is a good API for bots is a big plus of Matrix. I don't see any risks regarding bots with a move to Matrix.

---
feature: use-matrix-for-official-chat
start-date: 2020-05-19
author: Ryan Mulligan
shepherd-team:
shepherd-leader:
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Switch from IRC ([Freenode](https://freenode.net/)) to
[Matrix](https://matrix.org/) (#community:nixos.org) as our official
community chat.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The current official community chat host, Freenode, has lost its
leadership and its future is uncertain. Many Free Software communities
are abandoning it, so its network effects may be negative instead of
positive.

There are currently 1796 members of the Unofficial NixOS Discord
channel (244 weekly visitors, 95 weekly communicators). Some of them
might be convinced by the more modern features available on Matrix to
move their conversations there.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

Update the [NixOS.org community
page](https://nixos.org/community/index.html) to point to our Matrix
Space (#community:nixos.org) that has already been created which you
can join by visting the [Invite

> link](https://app.element.io/#/room/#community:nixos.org).

Reviewer 6: Notable difference: it does require signing up now in contrast to the ephemeral IRC identity you had before that.

Reviewer 7: This might raise the bar for contributing - e.g. Rust project uses a chat which also requires sign-up (they allow to sign up with social media or Git forge accounts though via OAuth) and that makes me a little bit uncomfortable.

Reviewer 8: There is an option **Who can access this room?** in the Element room settings, with one of the three options being **Anyone who knows the room's link, including guests**.

Currently, guests are allowed in #chat:nixos.org, but not #nix:nixos.org. Perhaps allowing guests in a few central rooms (or all?), and then hosting a neat guest widget without all of the registration flow might suffice here?
The chat widget might automatically join a specific room, or drop the user in the spaces view whenever clients mature.

Reviewer 6: Do we actually have software that does this already? I have a dedicated HS for "guests" that is supposed to provide ephemeral identities but right now Element requires you to sign-up to participate in a conversation. I believe the feature we are looking for is called ILAG and apparently that might make a comeback at some point: https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/issues/9264#issuecomment-818587925

Reviewer 9: Regarding the need for account creation, matrix is actually somewhere in-between of IRC (no account needed) and rocket chat/ mattermost/ zulip, where you need to create a new account for each community.
The beauty of federated open standards is that you need an account, but it's only a single one on an (almost) arbitrary server that can be used for all communities. The more communities are adopting that system, the less important is the assumption of people having an account. Thus IMHO that is an acceptable compromise.

Bringing back guest access would be neat anyways, although that might include a spam problem.

Update any other places that point to Freenode to point to Matrix
instead.

Port any bots that might be necessary such as:

* nix-channel-monitor
* github PR events
* karma bot
* eval bot
* factoids bot

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

People are used to Freenode and it might be harder for people to use
Matrix, which requires more complex clients.

> # Alternatives

Reviewer 2: Which always results in degradations of chat quality on one side, which is why I would be very careful about bridging in general.

> # Alternatives

Reviewer 10: I think there's a difference between "Matrix user uses a bridge to talk in an IRC channel", vs. "the community is on Matrix but an IRC interface is provided through a bridge".

In the former case, the baseline to compare against is "only native IRC users", whereas in the latter case the baseline is "no access from IRC at all". So long as the messaging around this is clear, I think that imperfect IRC access is better than no IRC access.

> # Alternatives

Reviewer 10: The more I think about it, the more I feel that the RFC should at the very least *mention* IRC bridging.

I think it's desirable to have this (with the understanding of it being a Matrix-first room, feature/convention-wise), not just to improve accessibility for a certain part of the community, but also because "my system won't boot and all I have is netcat" is a realistic problem for someone trying to access a distro room to have, and IRC can work in this scenario.

Libera does not currently have an operational bridge, but likely will in the future. OFTC already has an operational bridge today.

---
feature: use-matrix-for-official-chat
start-date: 2020-05-19
author: Ryan Mulligan
shepherd-team:
shepherd-leader:
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Switch from IRC ([Freenode](https://freenode.net/)) to
[Matrix](https://matrix.org/)
([#community:nixos.org][1]) as
our official community chat.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The current official community chat host, Freenode, has lost its
leadership and its future is uncertain. Many Free Software communities
are abandoning it, so its network effects may be negative instead of

> positive.

Reviewer 2: I feel a strong motivation is to improve the UX of the current chat solution to accomodate a broader range of people.

Discord should probably not be part of our motivation and instead a beneficial prospect.

There are currently 1796 members of the Unofficial NixOS Discord
channel (244 weekly visitors, 95 weekly communicators). Some of them
might be convinced by the more modern features available on Matrix to
move their conversations there.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

Update the [NixOS.org community
page](https://nixos.org/community/index.html) to point to our Matrix
Space ([#community:nixos.org][1]) that has already been created which you
can join by visting the [invite

> link][1].

Reviewer 11: Do we have a list of all the #nix- and #nixos- channels somewhere? What will they be mapping to? If we do that we should probably update all the channel topics so people know where to go.

Reviewer 9: That's the job of the space. Channel lists in topics are only relevant until spaces have a wider client support.

> Update the [NixOS.org community
> page](https://nixos.org/community/index.html) to point to our Matrix
> Space ([#community:nixos.org][1]) that has already been created which you
> can join by visting the [invite
> link][1].

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
Update the [NixOS.org community
page](https://nixos.org/community/index.html) to point to our Matrix
Space ([#community:nixos.org][1]), [hosted](https://element.io/element-home) by Element, which you
can join by visting the [invite
link][1].
```

Reviewer 12: I mean, the RFC is mentioning existing infrastructure, so I think it's good to be clear about its current setup, at the point the RFC is being discussed. This could change in the future without rendering the RFC obsolete, IMO. 

The "without any disruption" part has a few caveats, as mentioned in the edit below, so why not be clear?

I could change it to "currently hosted" if it helps.

Reviewer: The problem is that this is *not* the current setup. The community space is not hosted by Element. Rooms exist across all servers that have participants in the room. If you want to mention that there is currently a "nixos.org" Matrix homeserver hosted by EMS, that should be in a different sentence or paragraph.

Reviewer 4: The `#community:nixos.org` depends on it being available at that server which is hosted by Element. Of course we could use a more stable link like https://matrix.to/#/!MKvhXlSTLGJUXpYuWF:nixos.org?via=nixos.org&via=matrix.org&via=nerdsin.space which is less dependent on the state of the nixos.org server.

But still I think this is a insignificant detail. If nixos.org goes down for whatever reason we can just update the docs to point at the space via another homeserver (until we stand up a new nixos.org server).

Update any other places that point to Freenode to point to Matrix
instead.

Port any bots that might be necessary such as:

* nix-channel-monitor
* github PR events
* karma bot
* eval bot

> * factoids bot

Reviewer 13: I think it makes sense to find out what has to be ported (and which are not necessary anymore because e.g. there are existing Matrix bots) before "accepting" this RFC.

Reviewer 14: I can recomend opsdroid for simple matrix chatbot implementations. Has recently been merged to nixpkgs too.

Reviewer: I propose the following order-of-operations for the migration which (I think) should have fairly minimal disruption to end-users and allow us to put off some of the decisions about which bots too ultimately use:

1. Convert the service that consumes RabbitMQ queue to post to Matrix instead of IRC. (We can put IRC channel -> Matrix room mappings here so that the bots don't have to be modified.) This will allow for all of the bot functionality to exist in Matrix while we figure out details on the subsequent steps.
2. Incrementally convert the bots to post directly to Matrix instead of going through the queue (see below for comments on converting various bots). Depending on how we want to do this, all of the bots could just use the same account, or they could use separate accounts.
3. Once all bots are no longer using the rabbitmq queue, then deprecate it.

Regarding converting (some) of the bots to native Matrix bots:

* nix-channel-monitor: I recently submitted a proof-of-concept for the nix-channel-monitor to post directly to Matrix: https://github.com/grahamc/nix-channel-monitor/pull/4.
* github PR events: The maubot GitHub bot (@github:maunium.net) is pretty good. However, I don't think we want to rely on the hosted version. In general, I don't love the architecture of maubot, and I really think we could get away with something way more simple since all we need is open/close/merge events.
* karma bot: again, there's a maubot for this, but we may want to spin something less complicated.

> 

Reviewer 11: On FreeNode, anyone can create new channels how they see fit. This allowed informal groups to be created without having to ask for permission.

Is it possible to create arbitrary channels on the new server? If not, what is the process to handle that?

Reviewer 9: In principle, rooms (channels) are not tied to any server in matrix. They can have one or multiple aliases though for easier discovery and addressing, like `#nix:nixos.org` is one.
These aliases can be added later as well, allowing groups to form, grow under a non-official alias like `#nix-toasters:hardwarehackers.town` until they ask an admin of the nixos.org matrix server to give them an alias for that server as well, and add them to the space.

It might make sense to explicitly state this in the RFC and lay out a process, though.

Reviewer 10: Rooms on Matrix do not exist "on a server" - they are replicated to all servers which have participants in the room. Anyone is free to create a room, and any amount of addresses on any homeserver can be pointed at it, and it will exist independently of the availability of any given homeserver.

I believe the default permissions required to 'claim' an alias on a homeserver (such as `#somename:matrix.org`) are 1) has admin access to the room, and 2) is using an account on the homeserver in question.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> People are used to Freenode and it might be harder for people to use

Reviewer 9: I strongly oppose the phrase *harder* here. Transitioning from one system to another, from one personally established setup to another, is an effort indeed. But that is due to the fact of it being a transition, not because the other system is harder to use.
A good IRC setup also isn't that simple. E.g. I never got around to set up a properly working bouncer.

Alternative wording: People are used to Freenode, and the transition to another ecosystem requires some effort to get adjusted.

Reviewer 15: It is not _purely_ transition cost, though, unless norms very close to IRC ones are established. A stream of short strings is easier, and for some people it is easier to use than something non-homogenous (but not really structured according to structure of conversation)

Reviewer 9: >  A stream of short strings is easier, and for some people it is easier to use than something non-homogenous (but not really structured according to structure of conversation)

From a protocol pov that is true somehow, as long as you'd like to implement that protocol just on a socket. But most additional complexity for simple matrix clients (e.g bots) is abstracted away pretty well, because it is using a well-established technology stack of HTTP and JSON.

Regarding social norms, we might largely stick to the ones from IRC at the start. But over time at least the ones only established due to IRC constraints might change, like the multi-line pastebinning.

Reviewer 15: From communication point of view there is also this ton of questions what people are expected to notice if they are in a conversation. Reactions? Stickers? Whatever else weird feature? Also, is all the communication uniformly short-form?

That's not about HTTPS.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
People are used to irc and Freenode and it might be a big change for people to use Matrix, which requires different, code wise more complex clients.
```

Matrix, which requires more complex clients.

> 

Reviewer 11: Presence data is much more chatty in Matrix and can be turned off on the server level. For large rooms, it might be a good idea to do that. Especially since it leaks some level of personal information. But it's tunable only on the server level the last time I looked into it.

Reviewer: Presence is enabled on a per-server basis. If you do not want presence data, then you can use a server that doesn't support it. Matrix.org, for example, currently doesn't support presence notifications because they are so expensive computationally.

Reviewer 9: @sumnerevans Both of you are correct:
You're talking about the explicit sending of presence as a *being available or not* flag being broadcasted. That can indeed be disabled.
@zimbatm is likely talking about the read state marker being moved forward, which can be used to infer user presence.

Reviewer 11: Can presence not be turned off on a room level? Even if I turn it off on my server, the sync will still broadcast other people's presence and take up a lot of space.

Reviewer: @zimbatm it depends on what kind of "presence" you are talking about. If you are talking about read state, then that's not possible to disable at all.

If you are talking about the "presence" feature (which shows users as available or unavailable in the UI), then that can be disabled on a per-server basis, and it will ignore all presence notifications coming over federation, and will also not send out any presence notifications.

Reviewer 17: There is an open issue for disabling read reciepts: https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/issues/2527

Reviewer: Support for MSC2285 (hidden read receipts) just landed in Synapse v1.40.0rc1. Here is the PR: https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/10413. And here are the release notes: https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/releases/tag/v1.40.0rc1

> 

Reviewer 18: ```suggestion

Plain text is easy to log to a file; to copy around; to pastebin; to store in any number of cloud services; and to read, and to grep, even in the absence of one's chat client. The richer format of Matrix messages may make these tasks fundamentally more difficult, or perhaps more reliant on cloud services.
```

Relatedly: For freenode we have had @samueldr's public logs. How will those be migrated to serve Matrix, or what will replace them? If they're replaced by something offered by Matrix (e.g., @kevincox suggests "We can allow guests to view"), do we know...
* What is the log retention policy? Is it anything less than @samueldr's? I hear Matrix.org is too overburdened to retain logs long-term.
* Does the replacement have the features of the existing logs (search, linking to a specific message)?

Reviewer 6: There is https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-static for logging which we can supposedly just run our servers or use the hosted instance of matrix: https://view.matrix.org/room/%21sgkZKRutwatDMkYBHU:nixos.org/

Reviewer 5: xref https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/94#issuecomment-845321053

Reviewer 16: You can also directly link to messages https://matrix.to/#/!sgkZKRutwatDMkYBHU:nixos.org/$iQg3aR-SfW5hw3XyjuZaqIT5LJummMMWfuRE0EQjTzQ?via=nixos.org&via=matrix.org&via=fairydust.space

> 

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
In case the home server instance hosted by Element becomes unavailable, users who had their accounts on that server would lose access to their identity and history. DMs between those users would be lost. Therefore, at least one admin account should be hosted on another home server.
```

/cc @sumnerevans

Reviewer 7: These suggestions perfectly answer all of my questions. Having them in the RFC text is a good idea. Thank you.

The official Matrix rooms will be configured such that their history is publicly visible, unless there are strong reasons not to do so. Additionally, Matrix allows for third parties to set up a search-engine-indexable public log viewer.

## Bridging Matrix and IRC

Repeated interest was expressed in a bridge between Matrix and IRC. This RFC does not address the implementation details of bridging, but considers bridging to be a near-future goal, and proposes that a new RFC be drafted to work out the details.

In any case, to avoid a mismatch in cultural norms stemming from having two connected platforms, the Matrix side would be the 'primary side' of the bridge, with the IRC side serving as an access mechanism for those unwilling or unable to use a Matrix client. This means that, for example, Matrix-specific features may be used in the NixOS community even if those bridge awkwardly to IRC, and that all community moderators should be on the Matrix side.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* Long-term IRC users might find it difficult to get used to a different chat platform and client. However, we consider the aforementioned benefits to outweigh this drawback.

> * Participating in the conversations requires an account on a homeserver.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
* Participating in the conversations requires an account on a homeserver. However, due to the many publicly usable homeservers and the ability to self-host a homeserver if so desired, we do not consider this to be a significant concern in practice.
```
